To lessen your carbon footprint, choose a place that is accessible by train or bus rather than by airline. Instead of staying in huge hotels, consider staying in a youth hostel or an eco-lodge. Domestic flights to your location should be avoided since they produce a lot of garbage and pollution. Hiking or cultural tours are activities that respect the environment and local cultures. Buy local and ethical souvenirs rather than industrially produced products. Choose restaurants, stores, and activities that support local businesses and sustainable projects. Take your garbage home and place it in proper garbage cans. Don’t pollute the destination you are visiting. Donate to a local organization or sustainable project before you leave. Make a positive contribution to the destination you are visiting. Be respectful and sensitive to local culture and customs. Use a reusable bottle and fill it with drinking water rather than buying plastic bottles. Enjoy your trip!
There are usually hypes about the health benefits of certain foods but often these cannot be substantiated. An hour and a half boat ride from Belize city is a small island called Calabash Caye. On the quarter mile stretch of beach that makes up Calabash, there are three groups: the coast guard, Turneffe Atoll Sustainability Association, and a remote field station owned by the University of Belize. The field station is operated by a small crew of chefs and captains that come with visiting researchers and students to the island and keep it up and running while inhabited. Most beloved of the crew is Elvis. Elvis, an English-speaking Belizean native, is the station manager.
Never in my life have I met anyone quite like Elvis. When I woke up for the 5am sunrise every morning, Elvis would be awake performing various housekeeping chores across the island. He swept the dormitories to keep the sandflies from eating us alive and carried water from the ocean to our wet lab. When I woke every morning, I jogged along the short stretch of beach, over and over. The first morning, Elvis came down to the beach to ask me what I was training for. I told him I just liked to run, and it feels great to move in the morning.
Despite his daily tasks of physical labor, from sunrise to sunset, Elvis told me he wanted to be in better shape. The next day I convinced him to join me on my morning jog. After, he told me he would continue running as regularly as he could once I left the island.
Turneffe Atoll is the most beautiful place I have been, and I am grateful every day to have had the opportunity to visit and perform research. The locals so clearly get joy from sharing its beauty and bring positivity to everyone with whom they interact. However, the small area of beach surrounded by seagrass beds, coral reefs, and mangroves, was littered with trash, making it painfully clear how much this beauty will change in the coming years.
My morning runs, while personally cathartic, were also the only way I could conceive to have a direct impact on this dream destination. While I ran back and forth on the same small stretch of beach every morning, I picked up washed up milk jugs, old shampoo bottles, and discarded water bottles, and piled them up by the dock to be carried to the trash can once I was done running.
Never in my life have I met anyone quite like Elvis. When I woke up for the 5am sunrise every morning, Elvis would be awake performing various housekeeping chores across the island. He swept the dormitories to keep the sandflies from eating us alive and carried water from the ocean to our wet lab. When I woke every morning, I jogged along the short stretch of beach, over and over. The first morning, Elvis came down to the beach to ask me what I was training for. I told him I just liked to run, and it feels great to move in the morning.
Despite his daily tasks of physical labor, from sunrise to sunset, Elvis told me he wanted to be in better shape. The next day I convinced him to join me on my morning jog. After, he told me he would continue running as regularly as he could once I left the island.
Elvis watched me do this the first morning before dragging a trash bin down to where I had been piling everything. I never saw him carry it down, but I knew it was him when he joined me on the run the next day and continued collecting trash with me. I never saw any impact for these efforts. Every run looked just as littered as the one before. Every day new bottles were washed up into the piles of seaweed on the sand. No one day was I able to fully clean the beach, the sheer quantity of trash was too great. Regardless, the reefs proved resilient. While certainly degraded from past conditions, there was no denying the sheer beauty of the underwater masterpieces.
Elvis told me he has never been snorkeling. He said he was afraid of the water where he cannot touch the ground. My biggest regret is that I never got him into the water. To live in such a beautiful place, and have so much appreciation, while being afraid of it is such a paradox. He understood the importance of cleaning the beaches without observing the raw beauty of the reef. He was always intrigued and inquisitive about the experiments we were running. He connected with the land as a resource rather than an experience.
When Elvis first showed me how to chop a coconut, there was little to no instruction. Rather, he put a coconut at my feet and handed me a machete. As a 5’6” 20-year-old girl, I just looked at the rusty black machete the size of my arm, unsure how to proceed. Elvis showed me by example how to chop it in one swing. It took me more like 12 swings, but he didn’t let me stop until the coconut was fully cut, regardless of how inedible I made it.
Elvis taught me that education is one of many ways to learn. Intelligence comes from all walks of life and experience and observation are often just as influential as a textbook education. Elvis taught me that to understand the environment you must first understand the people that use the land; not only how they use it but also how they think and what they do on a day-to-day basis. While I hope to one day return to the island, I will always remember Elvis with a swollen left calf from when he missed the tree and hit his leg with the machete so many years ago; the man who woke up before sunrise to rake the sticks off the beach so I could run without cutting my feet.
